feat: Add documentation of the EdgeX MessageBus (#846)
edgexfoundry/edgex-docs: docs_src/microservices/general/messagebus.md

# EdgeX MessageBus

## Introduction

> Edgex has an internal message bus referred to as the **EdgeX MessageBus** , which is used for internal communications between EdgeX services. An EdgeX Service is any Core/Support/Application/Device Service from EdgeX or any custom Application or Device Service built with the EdgeX SDKs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EdgeX has an internal message bus referred to as the **EdgeX MessageBus** , which is used for internal communications between EdgeX services. An EdgeX Service is any Core/Support/Application/Device Service from EdgeX or any custom Application or Device Service built with the EdgeX SDKs. 

```

The following diagram shows how each of the EdgeX Service use the EdgeX MessageBus.

![[Insert Image of EdgeX MessageBus]](./messagebus diagram.jpg)

The EdgeX MessageBus is meant for internal EdgeX service to service communications. It is not meant as an entry point for external services to communicate with the internal EdgeX services. The eKuiper Rules Engine is an exception to this as it is tightly integrated with EdgeX.

> There are EdgeX services which are meant as external entry points, which are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The EdgeX services intended as external entry points are:

```

- **REST API on all the EdgeX services** - Accessed directly in non-secure mode or via the [API Gateway](../../../security/Ch-APIGateway) when running in secure mode

- **App Service using External MQTT Trigger** - An App Service configured to use the [External MQTT Trigger](../../application/Triggers/#external-mqtt-trigger) will accept data from external services on an "external" MQTT connection
  
- **App Service using HTTP Trigger** - An App Service configured to use the [HTTP Trigger](../../application/Triggers/#http-trigger) will accept data from external services on an "external" REST connection. Accessed in the same manner as other EdgeX REST APIs.

> - **App Service using Custom Trigger** - An App Service configured to use a [Custom Trigger](../../application/Triggers/#custom-trigger) can accept data from external services or over additional protocols with few limitations.

Reviewer 2: do we have some named example for this?

Reviewer 3: Good idea there's an example with trigger that reads from stdout we could link.

Author: Yep, here: https://github.com/edgexfoundry/edgex-examples/tree/main/application-services/custom/custom-trigger

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/edgexfoundry/edgex-examples/tree/main/application-services/custom/custom-trigger

- Device Services publish *Event/Readings* directly to the EdgeX MessageBus rather than sending them via REST to Core Data. 
- [Service Metrics](../#service-metrics) are published to the EdgeX MessageBus
- [System Events](../../core/metadata/Ch-Metadata/#device-system-events) are published to the EdgeX MessageBus. 
- [Command Request/Reponses](../../../design/adr/0023-North-South-Messaging) are now published to the EdgeX MessageBus by Core Command and Devices Services.  

This trend away from REST to the EdgeX MessageBus for inner service communication continues. In the future, Device Services will receive Device System Events via the EdgeX MessageBus  rather than the current REST callbacks used when devices are added/updated/deleted in Core Metadata.

## Message Envelope

All messages published to the EdgeX MessageBus are wrapped in a `MessageEnvelope`. This envelope contains metadata describing the message payload, such as the payload Content Type (JSON or CBOR), Correlation Id, etc. 

!!! note

>     Unless noted below, the `MessageEnvelope` is  JSON encode when publishing it to the EdgeX MessageBus. This does result in the `MessageEnvelope`'s payload being double encoded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Unless noted below, the `MessageEnvelope` is  JSON encoded when publishing it to the EdgeX MessageBus. This does result in the `MessageEnvelope`'s payload being double encoded.

```

## Implementations

The EdgeX MessageBus is defined by the message bus abstraction implemented in [go-mod-messaging](https://github.com/edgexfoundry/go-mod-messaging). This module defines an abstract client API which currently has five implementations of the API for the different underlying message bus protocols. 

### Common Configuration

Each service that uses the EdgeX MessageBus has a configuration section which defines which implementation to use and how to connect and configure the specific underlying protocol client. This section is  `[Trigger.EdgexMessageBus]` for [Application Services](../../application/GeneralAppServiceConfig) and`[MessageQueue]` for [Core Data](../../core/data/Ch-CoreData/#configuration-properties), [Core Metadata](../../core/metadata/Ch-Metadata/#configuration-properties) and [Device Services](../../device/Ch-DeviceServices/#configuration-properties). The `Type` setting specifies which of the following implementations to use. 

- **Redis Pub/Sub** (**default**) - `Type=redis`
- **MQTT 3.1** - `Type=mqtt`
- **NATS Core** - `Type=nats-core` 
- **NATS JetStream** - `Type=nats-jetstream` 
- **ZeroMQ** (**DEPRECATED**) - `Type=zero` 

!!! note

>     I general all EdgeX Services running in a deployment must be configured to use the same EdgeX MessageBus implementation. By default all services that use the EdgeX MessageBus are configured to use the Redis Pub/Sub implementation. NATS does support a compatibility mode with MQTT. See the [NATS MQTT Mode](#nats-mqtt-mode) section below for details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    In general all EdgeX Services running in a deployment must be configured to use the same EdgeX MessageBus implementation. By default all services that use the EdgeX MessageBus are configured to use the Redis Pub/Sub implementation. NATS does support a compatibility mode with MQTT. See the [NATS MQTT Mode](#nats-mqtt-mode) section below for details.

```

| AuthMode   | `none`        | Mode of authentication to use. Values are `none`, `usernamepassword`, `clientcert`, or `cacert`. The MQTT Broker is currently not secured in secure mode. |
| SecretName | blank         | Secret name used to look up credentials in the service's SecretStore |

##### Additional Configuration

| Option    | Default Value                                     | Description                                                  |
| -------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------- |
| ClientId       | service key | Unique name of the client connecting to the MQTT broker      |
| Qos            | `0` | Quality of Service level <br />0: At most once delivery<br />1: At least once delivery<br />2: Exactly once delivery<br />See the [MQTT QOS Spec](http://docs.oasis-open.org/mqtt/mqtt/v3.1.1/os/mqtt-v3.1.1-os.html#_Toc398718099) for more details |
| KeepAlive     | `10s`         | Maximum time interval in seconds that is permitted to elapse between the point at which the client finishes transmitting one control packet and the point it starts sending the next. If exceeded, the broker will close the client connection |

> | Retained       | `false` | If true, Server MUST store the Application Message and its QoS, so that it can be delivered to future subscribers whose subscriptions match its topic name |

Reviewer: Does the retention only apply to the last message? Is there a way to see the retained flag from the mqtt broker?

Author: Just the last message for a given topic per the MQTT documentation here: https://www.hivemq.com/blog/mqtt-essentials-part-8-retained-messages/

**_A retained message is a normal MQTT message with the retained flag set to true. The broker stores the last retained message and the corresponding QoS for that topic._**

Author: I'll add that link to the description

| AutoReconnect  | `true` | If true, automatically attempts to reconnect to the broker when connection is lost |

> | ConnectTimeout | `30` | Timeout in seconds for the connection to the broker to be successful |

Reviewer 2: the value is not in duration string format? e.g. `30s`

Author: > the value is not in duration string format? e.g. `30s`

Correct. This one is an integer. I know there is some inconsistency here. Something to fix in 3.0... 
https://github.com/edgexfoundry/go-mod-messaging/blob/main/internal/pkg/mqtt/client_options.go#L54

      KeepAlive    =  "10" # Seconds (must be 2 or greater)
      Retained     = "false"
      AutoReconnect  = "true"
      ConnectTimeout = "5" # Seconds
    ```

!!! example - "Example MQTT Configurations changes for Application Services"
    The following `Trigger.EdgexMessageBus` configuration settings must be changed for all EdgeX Application Services to use MQTT 3.1

    ```toml
    [Trigger]
    Type="edgex-messagebus"
      [Trigger.EdgexMessageBus]
      Type = "mqtt"
        [Trigger.EdgexMessageBus.SubscribeHost]
        Protocol = "tcp"
        Host = "localhost" # in docker this must be overriden to be the docker host name of the MQTT Broker
        Port = 1883
        [Trigger.EdgexMessageBus.PublishHost]
        Protocol = "tcp"
        Host = "localhost" # in docker this must be overriden to be the docker host name of the MQTT Broker
        Port = 1883
        [Trigger.EdgexMessageBus.Optional]
        ClientId ="<service-key>" # must be unique name of the service, thus the service key (app-rule-engine, etc) is used
        Qos          =  "0" # Quality of Sevice values are 0 (At most once), 1 (At least once) or 2 (Exactly once)

>         KeepAlive    =  "10" # Seconds (must be 2 or greater)

Reviewer 2: "10s" or "10"? the above documentation seems to suggest using 10s

Author: Good catch. KeepAlive is also an integer. Above needs to be corrected.

        Format =  "nats" # Use 'json' for backward compatability with services using MQTT
        ConnectTimeout = "5" # Seconds
        RetryOnFailedConnect = "true"
        QueueGroup = "" 
        Durable =  "" # Jetstream only
        AutoProvision = "true" # Jetstream only
        Deliver = "new" # Jetstream only
        authmode = "none"  # Currently in secure mode the NATS Server is not secured
    ```

#### Docker

The EdgeX Compose Builder utility provides an option to easily generate a compose file with all the selected services re-configured for NATS using environment overrides. This is accomplished by using the `nats-bus` option. This option configures the services to use the NATS Jetstream implementation. See [Compose Builder README](https://github.com/edgexfoundry/edgex-compose/tree/{{latest_release_name}}/compose-builder) for details on all available options. If NATS Core is preferred, simply do a search and replace of `nats-jeststream` with `nats-core` in the generated compose file.

!!! example - "Example Secure mode compose generation for NATS"

    ```

>     make gen ds-virtual ds-rest nats-bus

Reviewer 3: Love it!  Do we need to add empty properties to be overriden in the `optional` maps for any config files to support this?

Author: > Do we need to add empty properties to be overriden in the `optional` maps for any config files to support this?

Yes those will need to be added to all the TOML files. I will be adding Make targets to build with NATS and can include then then.
